He seems without humor, but he has a little more than they say.
I loved, by the way, when you were on the Today Show the other day, you corrected Jane Pauly on the pronunciation of your name.
I didn't like what she did, though.
She had never gone on the fucking program because she hadn't read the book and they hadn't read it.
They just gave her a list of questions.
She had a paper.
That's the official given event that she asked.
That's the way it works, though.
They have four minutes.
It's probably a four-minute segment.
You know why I picked that topic?
Well, you know why?
Because everything on television is what they've read in the New York Times two days earlier, which is what, there was a big piece on that in the Times.
And you'll find that I'm really not going to ask you that much about that experience today.
Well, it's in the book, though, and we'll certainly touch on it.
Anything I have to say is in the book on that subject.
I know that.
I wrote it very carefully.
That's why I say it seems foolish of me to ask questions that you've answered quite thoroughly in the book.
Where do we start?
The first time we met, and the piece I wrote, you said that you've had so many experiences as an actor, directing plays, doing movies, but that what matters to you most in the world is the respect of your children.
True.
I'm a Greek.
You're a Greek.
Go ahead.
When they read this book?
That was my question.
I was anxious.
I was very anxious.
I thought, would they like it?
And the two boys read it first.
One is 49, one is 40.
And they called me up and said, I'm proud of you.
So you know what the best of a Greek thought.
You know, it felt great.
And then the girls began to read it.
One of them said that she had a few objections, but basically she liked it.
Sort of like 90%.
And then my other daughter read it, and she said she was hurt by one thing, which is the way I treat her mother.
She and her mother were very close, closer than the other children were.
The other children were not so close, but she was very close to her, and that hurt her.
She liked the book in every way except that, she said.
And this kind of leads into another question.
I was apprehensive.
You're about to say that.
Yeah, because you're so frank and so candid.
about everything in your life.
And some might even say, Jesus, he's too candid.
Maybe that's a twin question.
Why did you feel the need to be so candid?
I mean, you're talking about, you know, everything.
Your love life, your womanizing, that's your word.
I hate the word.
I can contest the word in the book.
Well, yeah, but you also say that I've been here someplace.
It, uh,
I learned a lot from it.
Well, I'll get to it, but you use that.
Well, you have it in quotes when you say on page 380 that you're womanizing saved your life.
Did I put it in quotes?
Let's look it up, page 380.
I think you did, yeah.
I read the books.
It's silly to go and do an interview if you don't know.
You can't interview this book without having any book.
I've done so many of these, I feel.
I'm the book review editor, by the way.
Oh, you are?
You kind of just throw that in.
You can test the word.
I don't like the word.
I don't like the word because I think it makes it mechanical.
Like women aren't people.
If you take advantage of everything that the feminist movement is against, the womanizing to sort of take one after another, use them and throw them away.
That's what it suggests.
And I never did that.
I was always friends with them and they were always someone with whom I had a connection.
They were in a play of mine or in a movie of mine or some common interest or at the actor's studio with me or something like that.
So it wasn't that I went out fucking secretaries or prostitutes or anything.
It had to do with people who were equals with me.
I mean, the whole thing was conducted with conversation in one thing or another.
I mean, we meant something to each other.
But the suggestion that, however you wish to describe this activity, that it saved your life.
Yeah, it did.
I didn't mean to get into this so early in the interview, by the way.
It was no problem at all, in any order you want.
But it made me feel, at the beginning, that I wasn't just an outsider, that I wasn't just a funny-looking kid.
I look all right here now, probably fair, but I was pretty funny looking.
He was a pretty handsome guy.
I was very tense, very unsure of myself, and it helped in every way like that.
But it also taught me a lot of, I had no sisters, it taught me a lot about the other sex, too.
And it fed my curiosity, and then when I came to the right place by women, I understood them much better.
You contend that with the single notable reception of Brando, that women are the better actors?
a little bit better on a whole.
If I had to make any generalization about them, I'd say I got more respect for them as actors.
It's more natural for a woman to act, it seems to me.
They resent that when I say that, but it is more natural because that's according to whom they're going to see that now, do they not?
Men don't particularly, and I don't think they do anyway.
And they play up to everybody.
They wonder what will interest them, and they play up to them.
They're acting a lot of the time in that sense.
I don't mean falsely, but truly.
The acting tradition, though, comes from men, doesn't it, from the Greeks and the Shakespeareans?
The Shakespeareans, of course.
Yeah, men playing women.
Men playing women, even.
The Greeks and the Shakespeareans, men playing women.
Yeah, and yet, since they've developed their own tradition, you feel that they've surpassed the men?
It's more natural.
It seems to me.
I may be wrong, but it seems more natural to me.
Every time a woman comes in here, she's entering this...
She's entering a set.
You watch when they come in.
They're charming and entering a set, and they want to make a certain impression.
They're nice, that's all.
Life's more interesting to them.
A lot of men resent it, like Brando did.
A lot of men I know don't like the fact that they're actors, and don't like acting.
It's humiliating to them.
Ask Brando, I don't know.
It's true, though.
George Scott was that way for a long time.
He hated it.
He hated what?
Acting.
He hated acting, and yet, I mean, that's a paradox.
He's a damn good actor, very able.
Well, why even continue with it?
I mean, to make a living?
What are you talking about?
He makes millions.
So that obviously, I mean, to make a living, that's why they do it.
Do you like to review books you don't like?
No.
No, of course not.
Are you still as angry as you used to be?
You say towards the end that, okay, I'm a bourgeois.
I'm not.
No, I'm just kidding.
You're just kidding.
We'll say that.
No, but I'm not.
But you settled, you all.
I'm not angry.
I'm happily married.
The great thing in my life was doing that book you got at your right elbow.
That was a great thing that I ever did in my life because it said everything.
I talked about everybody and relieved me a lot.
You know, it eased everything out.
So I finally spoke of it.
Was it?
A therapeutic exercise?
No, it was a desire to write everything I felt about everybody.
Call that therapeutic therapy.
When you say, was it a therapeutic exercise, it sounds like it was done as part of an exercise.
Therapy?
It wasn't a therapy at all, no.
I enjoy it every day.
I work three and a half years on it every morning.
It's marvelous.
And deep down you're telling a story, too.
My own development.
Your own development.
Would you like to consider this, I mean, and I hate to search for absolutes, but as your monument?
Not a monument, but as my final word.
As I go down, I mean, I hope I live twenty more years, but as I go down, I say, well, I did that book.
I did nothing else.
Really?
Well, how many movies and plays do you do, written by other people?
about other things with actors and everything else, you know, that doesn't say even the best of them, exactly what you feel this book does.
Perhaps you might even give me a statement on that as to why writing is more satisfying because it is an individual creative work, whereas the other creative endeavors are by committee.
That's also the subject.
Sorry?
It's also the subject.
writing can be creative, it can be creative about a lot of different things, but this subject was of final interest for me.
You've, despite all the years you've spent in New York and in Hollywood, which you say you detest by the way, I don't like it.
I don't like anything about it.
I mean, you're clearly an American man, but
A lot of the Anatolians seems to have stayed with you.
Right.
Is that a correct assessment?
Absolutely.
Would you describe an Anatolian particularly as regards yourself?
Well, an Anatolian is a Greek who lives under Turkish domination, and they develop qualities of survival, of being clever, qualities that I don't particularly like, of being clever.
I don't know what the word for it is.
but being sly, not quite saying the truth, getting along at whatever cost, those are qualities I didn't like and I've had to get rid of.
I mean, I spoke out in this book, I spoke out directly and frankly without trying to make an impression.
So this book is sort of the end of my development from being an Amazonian to being what I am now, which is not an American, but which is sort of a citizen of the world.
I mean, I don't believe I'm any particular New Yorker or anything else.
I think all people are the same.
Is that clear what I said?
It is, yeah.
And you also described the mask, the Anatolian mask that you developed.
Smile.
And the Anatolian smile.
Let's get along.
I'm a cute guy.
I'm a smart guy.
I'm a funny guy.
Look at you.
I mean, you do the same.
You get the same smile.
That's the Anatolian smile.
You probably had a bad thought.
You're covering it up.
That's the way we are.
But anyway, you have to get over it.
You do get over it.
I mean, not you.
No, I know what you're saying.
Excuse my presumption, but we all have to get over it.
We have to say, look, we're as good as anybody else.
And when you're brought up in Turkey and you're a Greek and you leave the country at the age of four and you're glad to get out of there.
Well, I'm just quoting you.
You mentioned the Anatolian Greek tactic of successfully blending in with the Turkish oppressors.
Do you think that's true?
Of course it's true.
I spoke Greek at home and Turkish on the street.
Are you still fluent in these languages?
Yeah, I speak Turkish and Greek.
Both of them.
Really?
You get along both countries, yeah.
Now, when you came to this country, I imagine you quickly tried to assimilate yourself and become an emerita.
You got it.
And perhaps this might explain anxiously assimilate.
I was anxious about it.
I want to be part of it.
It explains by going to Williams College.
What the hell did I go to?
I went to Bates, by the way.
Huh?
I went to Bates College, which is not unlike Williams.
Oh, not unlike it?
Full of goys?
I was the only Greek kid there.
I waited for four years.
I waited on table to a lot of elitist kids that were too nice to know they were elitist.
I have to feel that was one of the most impressionable things.
You're right.
That's ever happened to you.
I never got over it.
I mean, having to wait on these bastards.
They weren't bastards.
They were nice kids.
They were all right.
They threw roles in me a couple of times, but they were nice kids.
What did they call you?
You remember?
Uh-huh.
What did they call you?
Eli.
Sure, that's... Eli.
A Jew.
That's right.
They couldn't help between a Jew and a Syrian and any other goddamn thing.
At that point in your life, certainly, you never would have expected that you would have...
get involved in the performing arts.
I never wanted to be in the theatre, not until I got in it.
I didn't know what the hell I wanted to do, honestly.
Nick, I didn't know what the hell I wanted to do.
All I wanted was not to work in my father's store.
Well that breaks with that, as you point out, that really breaks with tradition.
Talk about the eldest son takes over the father's store.
Takes it over.
I love those pictures in the book where he's
finally appreciating your clippings.
You can write this fucking interview without talking to me.
You know all about me.
You were successful despite yourself is basically what he's thinking.
He used to call me hopeless case.
I love it.
Oh, my father has a business and my brother became a lawyer and I'm a writer.
You escaped.
It's done wonderful things.
It put us through college, it gave us a good living, but, you know, we wanted to do other things.
And it's hard to pay tuition.
It was $400 in those days, but after that, it was amazing everywhere.
You mentioned also that it took a trip to your village to really appreciate the Ned, to begin to understand.
I wonder if you could talk a little bit about that.
Yeah, well, when I went back to where he came from, which was mid-Anatolia,
I realized, I pictured him there and I realized how brave he was getting out of there.
I realized how courageous that act was getting out of there and how lucky I was that he did it and how much I owe to him.
It first occurred to me.
He goes, now watch this beautiful creature ringing.
He looks forward to this time of the day, as I call it tea time.
I do.
My wife and I just... Look what she brought you.
I'm going to pass.
We just had lunch at the oyster box.
Oh, none of this.
None of this.
Can't do that.
You're going to hurt our feelings.
Thank you.
A little mixed bag.
He'll have a little.
He's Greek.
Thank you, Laura.
Look at this.
Are my friends Janice and Rana here today?
They should be back.
Rana has returned and Janice will be back.
I'm going to say hello to you.
Oh, sure.
They would like to see you.
Before I head back to...
Massachusetts.
Drove in this morning because I... You want to drive back out?
Yeah.
What's it take?
You know what it takes?
Six hours.
It takes three hours to drive down and three hours to take the shuttle.
I mean, I left my house in Grafton.
You know where Nick Gage's house is?
Thank you.
Where Nick Gage's house is.
I live from maybe 45 seconds away from his house.
From Nick's house?
From Nick's house.
We're neighbors.
Nick and I are neighbors.
We're pretty friendly, I must say.
We're pals.
As much as we can be, I suppose.
But, uh...
It took me, I left my house this morning at 8.30.
We were in New York at 1.25.
I parked the car.
My wife's with me.
She's out shopping.
We've got two little girls there in school today.
And here we are.
We'll be back home by 7 o'clock tonight.
Who takes care of the girl?
We're there in school, and we've got a babysitter coming up at 2 o'clock.
I thought I'd take my wife to the town today to buy her lunch.
You're a regular Greek.
Got to be, you know, gave her a credit card and said, well, we'll buy some.
some pretty clothes right i hope you've met her before you might remember her first let her bring her in she's right she didn't i wanted to bring her in you know but uh she's probably best doing she's right she's out shopping but we'll see her on the way home she read the book she was i just got this book a week ago so she's got it after i do she's grabbing at it but when i'm done she has it next to her
I was impressed that you interviewed your parents on tape.
I mean, you've been working three and a half years on the book, but I have a sense that you've been working on this book all your life.
Right, right.
I mean, when you interviewed your parents, and certainly asking them pertinent questions that... I'm a saver.
You write me a letter, I save it.
I make a note on you, I save it.
I notice something, I hear a joke, and I think it's good, I save it, I save everything.
I had a mountain of material for this book.
That's very important, because one of the reviewers, was it Dr. Schlesinger, I wonder, who was so impressed by the detail that you remembered all these conversations.
I told him.
I met him at the party.
I didn't remember all those conversations.
I only remember what was important to me.
I mean, beyond what I wrote down, I remember only what was important to me.
I can't remember what I did yesterday.
No, yesterday I can remember.
Not the day before, though.
Why is that?
I don't know, I just don't remember.
Unless it's important.
I only remember something important.
It makes an imprint.
Well, now you mentioned that scene where you had this confrontation with the guy from Detroit.
Yeah, I wrote that down.
That night.
You went back and wrote it down that night.
Now here's something that happened 50 years ago.
You saved it for 50 years for this, 50 odd years ago for this book.
I wrote it down that night.
That night.
Not that night.
Later that same night.
I went home and wrote it.
So I wouldn't forget it.
It's amazing.
That's why the detail is so fresh.
Other stuff I forget.
You say, you know, I have the sense also that, like the Greeks, you spit in the face of death.
You defy it.
Well, I'm reading your book.
I mean, you're in this book.
You are this book, you know.
That's a good way to say it.
I think I agree with that.
The better or worse than him.
Well, that's it.
But do you fear it?
78 years old, I'm good health.
It looks spectacular, by the way.
I've held the hands of a lot of people when they died.
and I saw them die.
And I know I've put in four of them, but there are a lot more.
Five of them, I described Clifford's death, too.
And there are a lot more.
I'm fascinated, but I'm afraid of the truth, because I think what Harold Kuhlman said, how a man dies just tells a lot about how he lived.
I'm not afraid of it, no.
I'm not afraid.
One thing that helps me a lot is the fact that my children love me.
If my children had anything against me, I have five children.
If they had things against me, I wouldn't be as happy as I am, or resolved, or at ease as I am.
I've got a good wife now, cooks my dinner once in a while.
That's a Greek thing, huh?
Oh, I love that opening cry.
This is my wife, I'm happy with her, but I wish the hell she'd stop asking me if I'm angry, you know?
That's a cute song.
I have to say, I collect.
I'm a book collector, first edition.
I'm going to ask you to describe this before.
I'm glad to go later.
It's a pleasure.
Two of the authors I collect, Uliad Pizan, of course, but I also collect Tennessee Williams and Arthur Miller, who I would have to say are the two great playwrights of our time.
I mean, is that a fair assessment?
It's not an obvious assessment, perhaps.
You think I'm mean to Arthur Miller?
No.
Not on the whole.
I'd flatter him, really.
You'd flatter him.
I mean... Tennessee Williams is, of course, a thousand hours of battery.
And I was very moved by that letter that you wrote for delivery at his memorial service.
I was going to ask you about, you know, as I was formulating this interview, reading the book, and then I came from that, I said, he's answered it right there.
He's answered it.
Be happy for what the man did.
I mean, he's with us.
His work is with us.
Talk about how unhappy he was bullshit.
He really... Well, he's lucky he died when he did.
If he were alive today, he'd die of AIDS.
That's my own personal opinion.
He worked.
I mean, that's said as a statement because of what you hear about the man's indiscriminate promiscuity.
I mean, that's... This is off the record.
I'm just saying this is not... I'm off the record, but I think, too.
I mean, it's true, isn't it?
I don't know, but that's my guess is that.
But you worked with them, not only worked with them, but in the preparation of their greatest works.
And I wonder if you could just give me a sense of the two playwrights.
Just talk a little bit, maybe I can ask you a question.
Well, like you said before, it's all in the book, but I will try it.
Tennessee was more...
Secret, more reserved, more imaginative, gentler, more compassionate.
Compassion is an outstanding characteristic of his 20s.
Arthur Miller was a great storyteller, but very definite by what he felt about everything.
I think he wrote from a desire to make a statement.
So when understood the human condition better?
I respect Arthur.
Arthur really stayed in the theater, for one thing.
I didn't, I quit it.
He always had something to say.
His plays always had theme.
You don't find that much in the movies and the plays today.
They lack theme.
They don't know what the hell made the author sit down and write him.
Aside from everything else, I had great personal affection for one of them, and lost it for the other.
I used to have, we were like brothers at one time.
But the political thing, I didn't care about that.
The guys that disagreed with that, that I did too.
But in effect, what they said was, look, we didn't like what you did, but you're still our friend.
John Steinbeck was that way.
said the same thing they never changed where they stood they realized i have a right to my own viewpoint and very good but you also pointed out how erected clip was that that's one of the saddest parts that's true that that's a tragedy i mean as you described going out to visit him in california it's true it's too bad he couldn't hack it he couldn't help with him what you just said is true he couldn't hack it
And it went on for years, I mean, what happened.
And nobody can tell me, nobody knows what cancer comes from.
There isn't a doctor in the world who knows anything about it.
But I think it comes from a diminution of the body's will to resist.
I mean, we all have this immune system in us that resists the disease germs that are in all of us.
I don't know.
This is not theoretical.
You know who also believes this?
I'm not medical.
You understand?
But I want to tell you who does believe it.
You know, Michael Crichton, who's a pharmacist?
He believes it, too.
He believes it.
And he's a trained physician.
I mean, they would practice and he'd bring it.
That's what I believe.
I've seen it so often.
He said it.
He absolutely believes it.
You bring up these things.
And I believe Tommy Thompson.
Remember him, the writer?
Sure.
Wonderful guy.
He firmly believed that Birch, remember, just don't ask me how we ended up discussing Birch Bayh, the senator, whose wife died of cancer, and Birch Bayh was considered one of the biggest swordsmen in Washington at the time, you know, and he believed that
Perhaps his wife did this as a statement, as a desperation, subconsciously.
Did he tell that to you?
He did tell it to me.
To you?
To me.
Private.
Private on tape.
I don't tell it.
It's not that I would never use something confidential.
I'd keep it to myself, but I don't tell it.
Use it.
The man's deceased.
It's not privileged anymore.
It's an act of revenge.
He felt that way.
And then Baye resigned from the Senate and he wrote this book, I almost think as a
as a gesture to seek retribution, I mean, redemption.
Redemption.
Not retribution.
Redemption, because he felt guilty.
That sounds as good as anything else.
I'm sorry to go off on this.
I'm just validating what you said on that particular point.
We did talk about your kids, and that's very important to me to have this story, the respect.
of your kids and the approval.
The approval of your children on this?
What if you don't?
Did your kids read this in manuscript?
No, no, no.
Yes, yes.
No, wait a minute.
Not manuscript.
Galley.
Wait a minute.
Two of them read it in manuscript and three read it in found galleys.
Well, let me just ask a hypothetical question.
What if they objected to a lot of what you were doing?
I would have felt terrible.
That would have changed it.
I imagine you tried to explain to them how important it is.
I might have tried some, but this is a book where you either like the basic intention or you don't.
I was lucky.
I really was.
I was also scared about my wife, my cousin wife, my third wife.
She liked it, too.
God has blessed you with the people who love you, apparently.
They don't love me only.
What they love is the fact that when they read the book, even a few pages, they realize the guy's leveling.
Well, it's trust.
What?
It's trust as well, I think.
They say the guy's telling the truth, and he's as tough on anyone else as he is, on himself, as he is on anyone else.
Is it important to hear the last thing I said?
I did, sir.
That's the problem with tape recorders.
You know, you're always thinking, instead of taking notes,
No, no, no, no, it isn't that.
It's important to me that you asked me how the hell you had a miracle, God blessed you and all that.
The reason he blessed me was that I didn't fudge on anything.
I tried to tell the truth.
But I was going into a follow-up on that.
On the need to tell so much truth.
to be so confessional, to be so frank, to expose yourself, to make yourself naked.
There are two things.
One is to expose yourself, which I don't care about.
I'm 78.
I don't care what everybody thinks of it.
But the need to tell it all.
You can't go halfway with this.
I don't think, I couldn't.
I started to write the book once, wrote 60 pages, and threw it away.
Why is that?
Just then I did, then I did, then I did, then I did, and then I did, and then I did, and then I met.
It's not worth the effort.
So you weren't going all the way with us.
So I waited a couple of years, and I waited another year, I waited about three years.
I said, I better do it right.
You also say frequently in the book that when you were acting, that one of the greatest charges I got, and this word is used a lot, a charge.
The biggest charge I've ever had, and this is when you were acting, I won that particular role.
You're saying that you need a charge out of what you're doing.
You need to be energized.
And I guess the converse of that is you must get bored pretty easily, too.
I mean, is life a series of... I've never been bored in my life because I never have been bored.
I've always done something.
If I'm suddenly out of anything that interests me, I find something that is.
I've never been bored in my life.
But the charge thing, charge thing, looking for something that stirs me is critical and important.
I have no leisure.
It's a curse.
I can't go fishing.
It drives me nuts.
Friends of mine say, let's go fishing now.
They took me bone fishing in the Caribbean and I really like the scenery and I like the bone fish and everything.
I hated to catch the cotton and bone fish.
I threw them back in as soon as I could.
I have no leisure in me.
I can't play cards.
You mean you can't relax?
No, all I can do is I can read.
I can read and write.
Do you relax doing that?
I want to relax.
Why should I relax?
I'll relax when I'm dead.
So if you're gold fishing, what's going on?
You say, what am I doing?
I'm being a nice fellow.
What would you rather be doing?
Writing?
I'd rather be home.
That's what I'd do a couple of days later.
I didn't go out.
I'd just stay home and read or just thought.
I don't mind having nothing to do.
But you say you've never been bored, yet you reach the heights as an actor and you'll leave it.
You're the hottest director on Broadway and you kiss it off.
Not because I'm bored.
Well why though?
I want to move.
Well I mean there must be an affinity.
There must be a flying line between being bored or looking for the next kick, the next charge to use your word.
Maybe there is.
I don't know.
I look back on it.
When I was being an actor, I always wanted to be a director.
When I was a stage director, I always wanted to be a screen director as well.
There's a lot of as-wells in there.
When I was a stage, a screen director, I always wanted to be a writer as well.
I wanted everything.
Some guys said that critically of me, that I see them on everything in life and so on and so on.
Your friend Nick Cage is a little like that.
He is a little like that.
He's restless.
He's nicer than me, but he's a little like that.
he wants it all yeah and and like he had a week's vacation with his family down the cape and i mean and he had a wonderful time but i could i sense that the guy you know where is he now he's got an office in a house i think he's in california he's in new york i talked to him in new york last friday yeah i told him i was coming down to see you what did he say i said you know tell him i love the book but you know he wrote the blurb and uh i i just asked him he liked the book it was a lot like him
In fact, he had told me a few things about it.
I remember coming across a few things that sounded familiar.
I remember he had told me that one scene where you gave the director, this guy that was with this woman, and you told him what room you would be staying in, knowing implicitly that the woman was going to show up.
That was the old days.
It's all over now.
this as well.
It was vengeful.
I don't have a vengeful feeling.
That's the question here.
You say, I am not a forgiving man.
Has that changed?
No.
I'm not a forgiving man, but not in that way.
I'm not vengeful.
You really went after that guy to kick that guy in the nuts maybe a little bit.
Not him, but his type.
His eminence.
The officers in the army I knew.
Yeah, dig the trench, do this run here.
You know, all that kind of shit that I had to go through.
I don't exercise vengeance now, but I do have vengeful feelings.
I don't have them anymore.
I put them in a book.
What do you think I wrote the book for?
I got it off.
I relieve myself, as they say, of a lot of stuff in it.
You've written six books, seven books?
Novels, they're different.
Oh, I know.
I've read a couple of them.
I mean, I read the Anatolian and I read... The Anatolian's good.
That's the best book I've read.
That was good.
We've talked about that.
Yeah.
And that's because there was a lot of you in that.
Yeah, it's my favorite book of a novel.
I mean, it doesn't compare with what I put in this book.
So what do you do next after this?
Well, I've written another novel.
I wrote it four or five years ago.
It needed revision.
I may revise it.
I may make a film of it.
I'll do something.
Right now I'm going to take it easy a while.
But you're not going to relax.
No leisure time.
See what happens.
I'm much more able to take leisure time now, Nick, because I haven't got something driving me here.
Write that book I'm talking about.
You like the cover?
I love it.
It's beautiful, isn't it?
I love the whole book, and I just love the way they've incorporated the photographs into the text.
It was my idea, but they did it in a way that made it work.
Yeah.
This is a good company.
This is the best.
This is the Tiffany book publisher.
They're a real good company.
Yeah, they're wonderful.
They cared a lot.
They gave a shit, you know.
I didn't find one type of one there.
I mean, and this is an 859 page book.
They gave a lot.
They care a lot.
They gave a lot of time and attention.
It was thrilling to me, really, to be able to, because I admire them so much.
Yeah, they're wonderful.
The last book was with this house, too.
Yeah.
As I recall.
That's the Unsold, I remember.
Yeah, they did.
I can't believe it when you say, I am a mediocre director except when a player or film touches a part of my life experience.
God's truth makes it true.
Come on now.
Isn't that a little self-effacing?
No.
It's the truth.
God's truth.
It's the opposite of self-effacing.
It's posting.
I have so much integrity that I can only do one kind of thing.
In a funny kind of way, it's posting.
I can only do a play if it in some way touches me.
I can't do it.
I was at Lincoln Center.
What can I do there?
Nothing.
I did shit.
My workday was terrible.
I deserve to fail there.
I can't do classics.
I can't do high comedy.
I have a sense of humor, I suppose, but I can't do musical comedies.
You start thinking of what I can't do, it's mostly theater.
You understand now?
A little better?
That shit, I'm telling you the truth.
And the fact that every time I tell the truth, I feel better.
I'm relieved of that, why should I pretend I can do what I can't do?
You end the book like that.
It's almost, to go back to a Greek concept, it's almost a catharsis.
Yeah.
You really have purged your soul, so to speak, of this weight, of this burden.
Three and a half pounds of stuff there did it.
I am purged.
And then just the way you conclude the book, it's a relief for you.
I mean, this is it.
Here I am, and I told you this story.
Did you have any idea it was going to be this long?
And it's mesmerizing.
I mean, you cannot skim this.
I cannot skim this book.
Oh, no, but it began to appear that it would be very long, and I tried to cut.
I guess I cut 150.
Maybe a little more than a hundred pages out of it.
I thought once, two hundred, but I think it's about a hundred and a quarter pages.
I cut out some good stuff, too.
I've got to go back to the directing because, okay, so if it touches your life experience, you mean there's nothing in Hamlet that could touch?
Doesn't Shakespeare speak for all time?
Yeah, he could, I guess.
I mean, you pick the play that does touch me because it's about father and son, about revenge for your father and son.
loving your father after he died.
You pick the one, maybe.
But I got offered a lot of Shakespeare plays to do, and I wouldn't know how to start.
And I did one Elizabeth play.
It was awful.
Which one?
The play I did, Lincoln Center.
It was terrible.
That's all.
And then you say you're not an intellectual.
You are not an intellectual on here.
You consider yourself intellectual?
Bullshit.
I read a lot.
Yeah, I read a lot, too.
I'm not intellectual.
I mean, I don't like intellectuals much.
I mean, we're human beings.
What is an intellectual?
A guy that makes books out of other people's books.
You say, what I need, I steal.
I'm quoting you, Leah Kazan, right?
A guy that makes books out of other people's books.
That's what intellectuals do.
They sit around, they read, and they make another book out of it.
Do you want me to take a couple of shots here while we talk?
No, no.
Let me ask you another question so you can be talking.
You say acting is a sexual act.
It is, yeah.
What do you mean by that?
Well, in the sense that the fellow gets up there and he's asking for people to admire him and look up to him and impress with him and so on.
In that sense, the sexual act.
You get enough light?
Yeah, this is very fast film.
It's a wonderful little camera.
It's amazing how everything has been made.
What is that?
It's an olympus.
Is that the one that you don't have to load?
No, I load it.
It's .35.
In fact, it's kind of flashy, which I don't even need.
There's a flash in it, isn't there, too?
There is, but I'm not using it.
I'm shooting it all the way up.
I don't like flash.
I hate flash.
How about as a director?
Did you like a lot of light, or do you like that natural light?
I like the streets.
Real sets.
I love the creation of every...
to be a play or a movie, to me, is fascinating.
On the waterfront.
That was good, my description of that.
Sad, wasn't it?
That's a tour de force.
Yeah, that description's very good.
It really is.
That's a lot of you in that, obviously.
Again, it's your own experience.
I guess it touches you, I guess I'm trying to get you to give me some quotes of that in the book.
You know what's good at the end?
about the play I did with Pinter and Spiegel and my mother dying at the same time.
I always liked that chapter.
It's terrible.
You do talk at some length in the book about the differences between directing for the stage and film.
Any one which you think is most demanding?
It depends how hard you try.
If you want to go all the way, like I did in this book or something, it would take you two years to do a good movie.
Write it, cast it, and so on.
It depends how much you want.
Everything is as good as you try hard.
If you try hard, it takes all that time.
You can skip through everything.
You know, in life, I'm talking about me, I don't know.
Listen, I hate generalizations, but I don't like to tell you or anybody
or you or anybody, generalize that, which is harder and all that stuff.
That's for textbooks.
They can be made hard or they can be made easy.
One movie I did was easier than the rest, called Sprinter in the Grass, for some reason.
That's a nice movie.
Huh?
The beautiful thing about movies, too, is that they last.
But I worked a long time getting that ready, and they worked a hell of a long time getting that ready.
But that went more easily than the others.
I had good actors in it.
I also wrote the screenplay, so that's not known generally, but don't say that.
I don't want to take away from Amy.
He wrote the screenplay?
Yeah, he got the Academy Award, but I put it together.
Did that annoy you?
Hmm?
Does that annoy you a little bit?
No, he deserved it.
He wrote the story.
Well, why should he give the screenplay?
I mean, why should he give the Academy Award?
Listen, I had enough credit.
It's like now.
It doesn't matter.
Don't worry about it.
I'm not going to use that.
We're going to turn it around so they can hear.
Okay?
Yep.
It's a nice little camera.
It's good.
It's better.
And this little machine is the best thing.
What kind is that?
It's a Sony.
I mean, when I first got one, they were that big.
Then they were that big.
And now they're down to these microphones.
And the sound is better.
Is that that clever?
Japanese.
Hmm?
Why can't the Greeks make these things?
They didn't win the war.
That's why the Japanese won the war.
They did win the war.
You mentioned in the book, you describe yourself politically for the record, a little left of center.
You think Ronnie's done nice things for the... Who?
Ronnie Reagan.
You say he's done nice things for the inflation, but you'd never vote for him.
What he did was...
If I have some money in the bank, it's not much less than it used to be.
My brother keeps saying to me, your money's leaking, your money's leaking.
You say often that you long for chaos, and that on the other hand, you're such an orderly man.
I don't know many people who have kept notes of all these conversations and details.
That's a contradiction.
At least, ostensibly, it's a big contradiction.
But actually, I like both.
I like order.
My room where I write is very orderly.
Everything has a place and so on.
At the same time, a 9 to 5 job and going out to dinner and dinner at 7 and bed by 10 every night is hard to take.
I mean, other people may like it.
I don't put them down, but it's hard to take.
I like surprises.
I meet people that challenge me and so on.
Traveling.
I like it when I don't know what I'm doing.
I think order is on a very rudimentary level.
Chaos is perhaps on the cosmic level.
I think you got a point.
It's philosophic and cosmic.
Yeah, again, it's getting a charge.
It's not getting a charge out of the... I see your article's going to be called Getting a Charge.
No, no, no.
That's not a bad title.
It's not bad.
Let's see.
It has been an eventful life, though, for you.
I don't think so.
Yes, we love.
And the amazing thing is, I'm going to change this.
You know what the amazing thing is?
I'm still in good health.
God bless.
Are you a religious man?
I don't like the religious man.
Antipathy, too.
How about the Greek background?
Does any of that superstition stuff ever come in?
Superstition, no, but they don't.
the art and the philosophy and the sort of a large view.
I really admire that.
One of the big experiences I had from the point of view tradition was sailing in a boat around the islands, the Greek islands, stopping here and stopping there and seeing the people the way they were.
And it was beautiful there.
But I like everywhere then.
I like Turkey too.
You mentioned at the end
There are so many things you'd like to do.
I'd love to own a home in Greece, but it's never going to happen, you know.
I almost did twice.
Is there a sense of going full circle or kind of going back to your... When I go back to Athens, I walk around, hear the language, but also a little bit of that happens when I go back to Turkey.
When I go to Haji Baba's restaurant, which is his father who went to Haji Hodge,
I see my father there walking around.
I've got a very complex background, don't you think?